# March-Madness-Project
Project Description: This program was a partner project where my partner and I tested different models to see which would best be suited to predict the 2025 March Madness bracket based on the match-up difference of regular season team stats of that year. This model would be trained on the outcomes and match-up difference of regular season team stats of the 2024 March Madness.

File explanations: Originally the project was coded into one notebook, however, after going through all our code, I split it into different notebooks so that our project would be more comprehensible. The code marked "Kevin code" was work done by me, and the work marked "Mack code" was done by my partner. The code marked, “Mack code (Modified by Kevin),” is code that I used from Mack’s code in the original notebook, but that I had to change/fix so that it would work in individual ones. Below is a short description of each file in the repository,

- Web_Scraping.ipynb: The code used to extract data from the NCAA and Sports Reference website to create data frames for the 2023 and 2024 March Madness.
- MarchMadness2022-23.csv: The 2023 March Madness data frame created in Web_Scraping.ipynb as a CSV file to use in other notebooks
- MarchMadness2023-24.csv: The 2024 March Madness data frame created in Web_Scraping.ipynb as a CSV file to use in other notebooks
- Model_Testing.ipynb: Our code where we tested the 4 different models mentioned
- Predicting_2025_March_Madness.ipynb: Code where we used the top 2 models we found to predict the 2025 March Madness. This also includes web-scraping code used to obtain the 2025 tournament match-ups and regular season team stats.

Model Training: The models were always trained on the results of the previous years' March Madness and the previous year's only because our personal opinion was that using data from later years isn't as reasonable since teams, coaching, and other factors change. We evaluated each model based on how well it predicted the 2024 March Madness matchups when trained on the 2023 March Madness data. We trained a total of 4 different models where we first tried tuning the input features then hyperparameters, and then doing it the other way around. In addition, we ensembled each pairing. I worked with KNeighbors and GaussianNB models and my partner worked with LogisticRegression and RandomForestClassifier models. The base input features we decided to start with were a personal decision made by my partner who had more knowledge of basketball than me.

Data Collection: We scraped data off two websites, the NCAA website and the College Basketball Sports Reference website. From the NCAA website, we got the 2023 and 2024 March Madness matchups and seedings. From the Sports Reference website, we got the regular season stats for the teams for each year. I web-scraped the NCAA website while my partner scrapped the Sports Reference website. My partner then combined all the scraped data into one data frame containing the matchups for March Madness and the difference in team stats based on the matchups.

Results: After comparing the statistics of each model, specifically the f1 scores, the model that performed the best was the Random Forest ensemble model we tested. The runner-up to this model was one of the GaussianNB models we also tested. Although statistically, these models tested well, my partner and I still came to the conclusion that the March Madness tournament is something that is very difficult to predict. My partner who knows more about basketball than me was a little unsure of some of the predictions that both models output.
